[RELAXING MUSIC]
[HEART BEATING]
>> The beat of the heart is
with us from the beginning
to the end of our life cycle.
And yet most of us have been
introduced to their heart
as just a 10-ounce muscle
that pumps our blood
and maintains its
circulation until we die.
Looked at biologically, the
heart's efficiency is amazing.
If we take care of
our health, the heart
can work without
interruption for 100 years,
without care or cleaning,
without repair or replacement.
But for everyone too, the
heart has another dimension,
much more profound.
We find this in
popular expressions,
such as "listen to your
heart," "follow your heart,"
"put your heart into
it," amongst many more.
These expressions
of heart resonate
within all of us, whatever
your age, religion, ethnicity,
or education.
Actually, those expressions
can be found in most languages
and even in most
ancient cultures.
Over thousands of
years, ancient cultures
across the planet,
Mesopotamians, Egyptians,
Babylonians,
Chinese, and Greeks,
shared a similar belief and
knowledge about the heart
as a source of intelligence
and inner guidance.
They perceived that the heart
is capable of influencing
and directing one's
emotions, morality,
and decision-making ability.
Modern science is
showing us that what
has been said for
thousands of years is true.
We now know the physical heart
is an information processing
center in the body, sending
important signals to the brain
and the rest of the body.
It has a complex nervous
system called the heart brain
that talks to your head brain.
It produces a powerful
electromagnetic field that
is imprinted by your emotions.
Our heart influences
everything, from the way
we feel to the way we interact
with others, our brain
function, and our health.
Yes, your heart, at a
biological level, is talking.
The question is
are we listening?
The heart's intelligence
is not just physical.
It encompasses
some of the highest
qualities we have as humans.
Many of the highest quality
feelings we experience
are associated with the heart.
They would include emotions
like appreciation, care, love,
kindness, patience,
and compassion.
Their transformational
value is born
from our energetic
or spiritual heart,
which affects the physical
heart's information.
The heart is also associated
with a deeper source of wisdom,
an intuitive knowingness
that bypasses
normal, logical, linear
thought patterns.
This is often called the
"voice in the heart,"
and known to support us
with much better choices
and direction throughout
life's interactions.
Our heart's intuition
is the voice
of our true, authentic self.
When we're in connection
with that part of ourselves,
that's when we're able to
move beyond our limitations
and accomplish things
that can surprise us.
>> The qualities of the heart
are usually talked about
in terms of the emotions that
we feel-- love, and care,
and compassion, appreciation.
Those type of
emotional qualities
are often associated with heart.
But also, there are others, like
our nobility, dignity, honor,
courage, kindness, patience.
All those are what I call
the qualities of the heart.
And when we manifest those
qualities in daily life,
life treats us differently.
It feeds back to us differently.
When we put out those
kind of qualities
in our daily interactions,
life is generally
going to reward us in a
completely different way.
>> To me, the most powerful
quality of the heart is love
itself.
So if you could see
an entire rainbow,
and love was all the
colors of that rainbow,
you could break down
every quality of the heart
inside the color
spectrum of that,
whether it's care, compassion.
Really powerful one
because that helps not only
you liberate yourself from the
stress, and it helps healing,
but it helps others
and lifts them.
>> We can take charge of how
we feel more than we may think.
And so learning to connect
with these heart qualities,
activate them, nurture them,
actually send different signals
from the heart to the brain
that change how we perceive,
and give us more
ability to choose
how we respond to
situations that are
best for ourselves and others.
>> In quality of the
emotions we experience,
things like compassion,
appreciation, or gratitude,
just feeling good, that the
heart sends a very different
type of signal to the brain than
when we're feeling stressed,
or things like impatient
or frustrated, anxious,
these types of things.
>> When we're working
with the military,
and things like
courage, dignity, honor,
those are core heart
qualities that help lift them.
When I'm working
with health care--
compassion, care,
kindness, those
are heart qualities that
equally lift one's nature.
We just have to be honest
with what's meaningful to you.
>> So now, we're starting to
have a scientific understanding
that these higher quality
emotions that people always
associated with the heart,
really do affect the way
the heart beats, and the quality
of the neural signals being
sent to the brain, which
it then interprets.
>> And so I think it's important
to understand that the heart is
about a lot of things.
Certainly, it's about intuition.
Certainly, it's about
the physical heart.
But it's also about these
amazing heart qualities
that lend themselves to
providing the richness
and fulfillment
that we all deserve.
[HEART BEATING]
>> Most people would rather
feel loving, enthusiastic,
and appreciative than resentful,
anxious, or depressed.
But often, the world
around us seems
to be spinning out of control.
And despite our best
intentions, it's hard for anyone
to maintain their
emotional equilibrium.
Unfortunately, without our
heart qualities being activated,
life can become a
much darker place.
It doesn't have to be this way.
>> Right now, let's connect
with the heart by doing
heart-focused breathing.
Focus your attention in
the area of the heart.
Imagine your breath is flowing
in and out of your heart
or chest area, breathing
a little slower
and deeper than usual.
Try to feel like the
energy up in the head
is now flowing down
into the heart.
Keep your focus there, and
breathe deeply and slowly
in a casual, steady rhythm
that feels comfortable to you.
>> It's given me lots of
opportunities to choose
alternative options when
dealing, especially,
with teenagers.
There were times that
teenagers know a way to incite
an inflammatory response.
And just taking that moment to
stop and breathe for a second,
I, at times, felt like I had a
personal coach on my shoulder
that would say, "Or you
could say it this way."
And that was quite amazing
to be able to not respond in
what my children
expected, but to give them
an example of how to react
and respond from care,
rather than the typical
hysterical parent.
[HEART BEATING]
>> What are you feeling?
Perhaps you feel a little
more calm or balanced.
This simple heart-focus
exercise is just
a first step in your new
relationship with your heart.
There's more to come.
>> You now know more about
your heart's intelligence.
And you have experienced
heart-focused breathing.
In the next chapter,
you will learn more
about the science of the heart.
[MUSIC PLAYING]